---
layout: post
title: why phd
date: 2014-07-16 11:29
comments: false
categories: school, motivation, career
---

This fall I will begin studying for a phd in statistics at UC Davis. I expect that it will take 5 years. This post explains the motivation behind my decision. I'm doing it because I enoy it, and because the field offers exciting opportunities for those who are highly skilled.

Michael Lopez recently wrote a relevant post on [Deciding on a grad program in statistics](http://statsbylopez.com/2014/07/19/part-i-deciding-on-a-graduate-program-in-statistics/)

## Work

My experience at Cisco has been excellent. Cisco offered a stable, high paying career with benefits, a matched 401K, the whole nine yards.
It's comfortable and has afforded me some great opportunities to learn.Here I've been exposed to business data at scale, and it's a beautiful thing. I don't pretend to understand the full complexity of the Enterprise Data Warehouse after just a year, but seeing the way data is handled at scale has been very interesting.

With data I see vast potential. At work I have access to more data than I could ever hope to analyze. This is where the future is.

## School

Going back to school full time for 5 years is a big commitment. People realize that it takes many years of school to become a heart surgeon, or a patent attorney. Indeed, most professional jobs demand many years of training. Statistics falls in the category of requiring plenty of knowledge to do it well.

Statistics and data science is no different. Well, actually it is different because it's so new, and has become so hot lately. There are so many educational programs which are catering to it. But these programs vary widely in quality. 

People seem to think that I want to teach or do research. And that does sound fun. But it's a secondary goal. The main goal is to learn, and become an expert in the field of statistics.
For me this is a good enough way to spend the rest of my life. This is my profession, my career. Hack data for life :) People talk about finding your passion, something that you like to do. I did. Now I'm pursuing it. Life is beautiful.

I work in business intelligence. All day I work with data. I see tremendous opportunity in this field, opportunity to **understand**. Until the data is analyzed, nothing can come of it. We have some excellent technical systems and infrastructure in place to organize this data. 

The analysis is the critical skill set which is so rare. Things can be very subtle, and technical experts are hard to find. Many people receive *just* enough training in statistics to do the analysis they have at hand in their field. But there's nothing like having a strong foundation in the theory.

Computing fascinates me deeply. The intersection of statistics and computing is an area that will be so useful going forward. Data grows exponentially. Is our intellectual ability to understand this data growing as well? I doubt it.









